# ``git`` essentials  

_Version 0.1_ 

- [``git`` essentials](#git-essentials)
  - [Set up your `git` enviroment](#set-up-your-git-enviroment)
  - [Set up your SSH key pair](#set-up-your-ssh-key-pair)
  - [Add your SSH public key to your GitHub user settings](#add-your-ssh-public-key-to-your-github-user-settings)
  - [Cloning your GitHub repository](#cloning-your-github-repository)
  - [Staging the changes (adding files and folders) in a repository](#staging-the-changes-adding-files-and-folders-in-a-repository)
  - [Commit the local changes and push](#commit-the-local-changes-and-push)
  - [Pull the new changes at the server](#pull-the-new-changes-at-the-server)
  - [Misc](#misc)
  - [References](#references)


> If you find errors or have queries/suggestions, please email `clint [at] [iitgoa domain]`. 

## Set up your `git` enviroment  

I assume you use a Linux, Mac, Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL) environment. Execute the command  

    git --version 

to check whether git is installed. To add your credentials to git, use the following 

    git config --global user.name "Name"
    git config --global user.email "Email"

You may also wish add the following settings to avoid issues with line endings. Interested readers can look at this Stack Overflow [post](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/170961/whats-the-strategy-for-handling-crlf-carriage-return-line-feed-with-git/10855862#10855862) or this [blog](https://zachgollwitzer.com/posts/2019/git-crash-course/)

    git config --global core.autocrlf input
    git config --global core.safecrlf true


## Set up your SSH key pair 

We can check whether our computer already has an SSH key generated by listing files in the hiddend folder `.ssh`. 

    ls -la ~/.ssh | grep 'id_rsa'

It will list two entries `id_rsa` and `id_rsa.pub` if they exists. Otherwise, create the key pair via running 

    ssh-keygen -t RSA

from the home folder. 

## Add your SSH public key to your GitHub user settings 

Copy the contents of the public key file (i.e. `id_rsa.pub`) to 

-> GitHub Settings 

-> SSH and GPG Keys 

-> New SSH Key

Github now has a record of your computer. 

## Cloning your GitHub repository

First, create a GitHub repository named `cs102-git-essentials`. Then, from the command line execute 

    git clone git@github.com:<your GitHub username>/cs102-git-essentials.git

from the folder where you want to keep your local reposiory. It will create folder `cs102-git-essentials` with a hiddle directory named `.git`.  

We can check whether the *remote origin* is already be setup by running 

    git remote -v

## Staging the changes (adding files and folders) in a repository 

Once you have the repository, you can create folders and files in the local repostory folder and then you can stage (add) to the repository. 

    git add file_name.extension 

To add all files in the current directory

    git add .

To see the current status of the repository, run the following 

    git status

## Commit the local changes and push 

We now commit changes. That means the current state of the files/folders will be stored in the git repository permanently. 

    git commit -m "type a message to name the changes"

Once the changes are committed it can be pushed to the server repository 

    git push origin main


## Pull the new changes at the server 

Suppose your remote repository (at Github) is ahead of your local repository due to a recent change happened at the server. We then need to `pull` the changes down to avoid conflicts by the following command 

    git pull origin main 

Note that `main` is your current branch. 

## Misc 

To know the current branch, use the following [command](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/6245570/how-to-get-the-current-branch-name-in-git) 

    git rev-parse --abbrev-ref HEAD

or 

    git branch --show-current

Command `git branch` will show all all the local branches of the repository. The current brach will be starred. 

For a better visualization of your repository with all commits and details, use the following command 

    git log --oneline --decorate --graph --all


## References  

For more information, see 

1. [Git Crash Course - A Simple Workflow for Small Teams and Startups
](https://zachgollwitzer.com/posts/2019/git-crash-course/) by Z. Gollwitzer
2. Git [cheat-sheet](https://education.github.com/git-cheat-sheet-education.pdf) 

 


